After these things the word of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision,
saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great
reward.
^2And Abram said, Lord GOD, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go
childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus?
^3And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one
born in my house is mine heir.
^4And, behold, the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, This shall
not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels
shall be thine heir.
^5And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven,
and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto
him, So shall thy seed be.
^6And he believed in the Lord; and he counted it to him for
righteousness.
^7And he said unto him, I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of
the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.
^8And he said, Lord GOD, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?
^9And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, and a she
goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a
turtledove, and a young pigeon.
^10And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and
laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.
^11And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them
away.
^12And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and,
lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.

^13And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a
stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they
shall afflict them four hundred years;

^14And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and
afterward shall they come out with great substance.

^15And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a
good old age.

^16But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the
iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.

^17And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark,
behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those
pieces.

^18In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto
thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great
river, the river Euphrates:

^19The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,

^20And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,

^21And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the
Jebusites.
__________________________________________________________________

Chapter 16

Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid,
an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.

^2And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the Lord hath restrained me
from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may
obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.

^3And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram
had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband
Abram to be his wife.

^4And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that
she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.

^5And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my
maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was
despised in her eyes: the Lord judge between me and thee.

^6But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hand; do to her
as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled
from her face.

^7And the angel of the Lord found her by a fountain of water in the
wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.

^8And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither
wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.
^9And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and
submit thyself under her hands.

^10And the angel of the Lord said unto her, I will multiply thy seed
exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.

^11And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Behold, thou art with
child, and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael; because
the Lord hath heard thy affliction.

^12And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and
every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all
his brethren.

^13And she called the name of the Lord that spake unto her, Thou God
seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that seeth
me?

^14Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold, it is between
Kadesh and Bered.

^15And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son's name, which
Hagar bare, Ishmael.

^16And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael
to Abram.
__________________________________________________________________

Chapter 17

And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared to
Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be
thou perfect.

^2And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply
thee exceedingly.

^3And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying,

^4As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a
father of many nations.

^5Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall
be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee.

^6And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of
thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

^7And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed
after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

^8And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting
possession; and I will be their God.

^9And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore,
thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

^10This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy
seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.

^11And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be
a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.

^12And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every
man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought
with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.

^13He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money,
must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for
an everlasting covenant.

^14And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken
my covenant.

^15And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not
call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be.

^16And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will
bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall
be of her.

^17Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart,
Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall
Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?

^18And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!

^19And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou
shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him
for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

^20And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him,
and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve
princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.

^21But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear
unto thee at this set time in the next year.

^22And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.

^23And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his
house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the
men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in
the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.

^24And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised
in the flesh of his foreskin.

^25And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised
in the flesh of his foreskin.

^26In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.

^27And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with
money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.
__________________________________________________________________

Chapter 18

And the Lord appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in
the tent door in the heat of the day;

^2And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him:
and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed
himself toward the ground,

^3And said, My Lord, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not
away, I pray thee, from thy servant:

^4Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and
rest yourselves under the tree:

^5And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after
that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come to your servant. And
they said, So do, as thou hast said.

^6And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready
quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the
hearth.

^7And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and
gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.

^8And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and
set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did
eat.

^9And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold,
in the tent.

^10And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time
of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it
in the tent door, which was behind him.

^11Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it
ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.

^12Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old
shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?

^13And the Lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying,
Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?

^14Is any thing too hard for the Lord? At the time appointed I will
return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a
son.

^15Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he
said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.

^16And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and
Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.

^17And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;

^18Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation,
and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?

^19For I know him, that he will command his children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath
spoken of him.

^20And the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great,
and because their sin is very grievous;

^21I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will
know.

^22And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom:
but Abraham stood yet before the Lord.

^23And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the
righteous with the wicked?

^24Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou
also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are
therein?

^25That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous
with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that
be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?

^26And the Lord said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the
city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.

^27And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to
speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes:

^28Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou
destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there
forty and five, I will not destroy it.

^29And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall
be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty's sake.

^30And he said unto him, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will
speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I
will not do it, if I find thirty there.

^31And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I
will not destroy it for twenty's sake.

^32And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but
this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will
not destroy it for ten's sake.

^33And the Lord went his way, as soon as he had left communing with
Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place.
__________________________________________________________________

Chapter 19

And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of
Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself
with his face toward the ground;

^2And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your
servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall
rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will
abide in the street all night.

^3And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and
entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake
unleavened bread, and they did eat.

^4But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom,
compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from
every quarter:

^5And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which
came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know
them.

^6And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,

^7And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.

^8Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I
pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your
eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the
shadow of my roof.

^9And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow came
in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse
with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even
Lot, and came near to break the door.

^10But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to
them, and shut to the door.

^11And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with
blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to
find the door.

^12And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law,
and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city,
bring them out of this place:

^13For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen
great before the face of the Lord; and the Lord hath sent us to destroy
it.

^14And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his
daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the Lord will
destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in
law.

^15And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying,
Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou
be consumed in the iniquity of the city.

^16And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the
hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the Lord
being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him
without the city.

^17And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that
he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou
in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.

^18And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my Lord:

^19Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast
magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life;
and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die:

^20Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one:
Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall
live.

^21And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this
thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou
hast spoken.

^22Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou be
come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.

^23The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.

^24Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire
from the Lord out of heaven;

^25And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the
inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.

^26But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of
salt.

^27And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood
before the Lord:

And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of
the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the
smoke of a furnace.

